Here, I was asked if I need
a special introduction, but
I don't think it's necessary.
I am Friar Ivan, the parish priest
of this basilica, this church, this
parish, and also of the parish of Saint
Maximilian Kolbe in Bijenik, which is an
extension of the parish of Saint Anthony
towards Šestine, towards the foothills.
And today I will try to reflect
and speak with you about Saint
Anthony and the Word of God.
Here, this is the final topic in the
lecture series about the life of Saint
Anthony, about the charisma of Saint
Anthony, and the works of Saint Anthony
that you have listened to so far.
First, you talked about the call of
Saint Anthony, then about the humility
of Saint Anthony, about the miracles
of Saint Anthony, and about Saint
Anthony and the sacraments, which
Professor Karlić covered last Thursday.
What is perhaps important to say is that
no saint, nor any cycle of catechesis,
can be fully covered in any given time.
Above all, Saint Anthony speaks
through his closeness, his
presence, and his actions today.
We have made an effort and will
continue to do so, and we want to
go through some segments of his
charisma, his life, his actions, his
sermons, and his writings with you.
At least some segments should
help us today in how we will live.
In the sermons of Saint Anthony,
he says this: "Sing to the Lord
a new song," says Psalm 95.
That song is the knowledge
of the Holy Scriptures.
All worldly knowledge aimed at profit
is an old song, the song of Babylon.
Only theology is the new song, which
sweetly resonates in God's ears
and only it can renew the soul.
When we talk about Saint Anthony or
other saints, for example, when we say
Saint Maximilian Kolbe, you've probably
heard of him, or Blessed Miroslav
Bulešić or Blessed Alojzije Stepinac, we
say that they were saints and martyrs.
You might have dozed off a bit, so wake
up because this isn't a one-man show.
So, get involved.
Saints and martyrs, when we
have an additional description
of a saint, it ties to the most
important aspect of their life.
So, he was a saint, okay, that means
he lived morally, lived virtuously.
He wasn't sinless, that should be
clear to you, no one needs to explain
that to you, that being a saint is
not synonymous with being sinless.
It means that the mentioned person,
whether a male or female saint,
knew how to fight their weaknesses
well, persistently and strongly.
A martyr, whether male or female,
means that they gave their blood,
their life, for their faith in Christ.
That they were killed because of
it, that they were tortured and
killed because they were Catholic,
because they were Christian.
Now, Saint Anthony was not a martyr,
although he greatly desired to be
one, and in the first catechesis
you heard about the life of Saint
Anthony, this was mentioned.
That Saint Anthony left the
Augustinian order to join our
Franciscan order to become a martyr.
Because the bodies of the first
Franciscan martyrs, who were tortured
for their faith in Christ in Morocco,
were brought to the shores of Portugal.
And Saint Anthony sees this and
says, I don't want to live like
this or that, no, I want to go on
missions, I want to proclaim Christ
with my life, I want to lay down my
life for Christ, to shed my blood.
But guess what?
Saint Anthony was never particularly
a fervent missionary, nor was
he ever sent on missions, and
even less so was he a martyr.
When we talk about Saint Anthony on
that plaque, when you're in a church,
you should learn to read and observe
the things in that church, because
they are not there without reason.
On that plaque over there, when you
exit the Basilica on the right side or
enter on the left side, it says that the
plaque was erected on January 16, 1946.
What happened then?
You don't need to remember that; it's
not necessary for your salvation.
But you should know that Saint
Anthony is a Doctor of the Church.
So, just as Stepinac is a saint
and martyr, and Kolbe is a saint
and martyr, Saint Anthony is a
saint and Doctor of the Church.
This means...
That his way of speaking, his way of
interpreting the Holy Scriptures—not
the content, the content of the
interpretation doesn't change, but
the way of interpreting, the approach
to the Word of God, the approach to
preaching, the approach to theological
work—because Saint Anthony was a
university professor at one of the first
universities and the first university
in the world and in Europe, which is
the University of Bologna and Padua.
Saint Anthony was a university professor,
and that means he brought something
entirely new with his life and approach.
Something entirely new, and thanks
to his way of preaching, thinking,
and the way he conveyed it to
others, many souls were converted.
That's why he is referred to
as a Doctor of the Church or
also known as a Gospel Teacher.
This quote about the new and the
old, "Sing to the Lord a new song,"
refers to the old song that builds
on some old knowledge, that is, the
worldly knowledge we all acquire in
various ways through our primary,
secondary, and university education.
This knowledge is important, it
is valuable, but of course, it
is not enough to fully understand
all the reality around us.
And that's why Saint Anthony
speaks about theology here.
Of course, those of us who are ordained
as priests and other believers, laypeople,
who wanted to learn more about their
faith or get closer to God, we completed
an integrated university study, you
know how it goes, a theology study at
the University of Zagreb or elsewhere.
But Saint Anthony speaks
about that theology.
Theos logos.
These are the two components
of the word theology.
Theology is any discourse about God.
Any discourse about God.
We have systematic theology, we
have the catechism which states and
says this is how you should believe.
And that is the law.
No wavering.
The fact that you don't understand
something from the catechism,
that's not the catechism's problem.
That's your problem.
That's your problem because you
approach it too shallowly, without
detail, expecting to just skim
the cream off the top and be done.
It doesn't work that way.
The truth doesn't need to conform to
you; you need to conform to the truth.
And what Fr. Stjepan talked about today
regarding the Holy Spirit, open the
nozzles, open the valves, so that the
Holy Spirit, who wants to give equally
to everyone, to us who are here, can stir
up in you what has become sour, what has
become stagnant, what has fallen asleep.
And so when you're having coffee, at
weddings, wherever you go and however
you spend your time, and you say,
you know, I was really bored at some
spiritual retreat or I really enjoyed
the spiritual retreat or I felt great
during adoration or God really spoke to me
through the song Timo Azaštito and so on.
So, this is a talk about God,
a bit of theology, and that's
what Saint Anthony speaks about.
I have the impression that we have
a lot to say about everything, but
sometimes the least about our faith.
Therefore, I would like to
remind you of an event in Rimini.
Rimini is a city on the Italian Adriatic
coast, which isn't really great for
swimming if you've ever been there.
I wouldn't recommend it much;
you might end up in trouble.
Unless you've found some hidden
gem, in which case, let me
know where one can swim there.
It's about large cliffs.
So, there are cliffs and then
you have a chasm below of, I
don't know, 40-50 meters or more.
Why is this event important?
Because at the time when Saint
Anthony was in Rimini, he was
already a famous preacher.
Famous means people had heard about him.
So, everyone had already heard about
him and everyone was inviting him
to come and preach, proclaim, etc.
And he comes to Rimini, gathers the people
there in the square or in the basilica,
in the cathedral, etc. He preaches, but
they all collectively sit on their ears.
And no one wants to listen.
And then he loses his temper.
Saints often lost their temper, if you
read the biographies of saints carefully,
which I advise you to do, they often lost
their nerves, were very temperamental.
The least likely to become saints
are those with slimy personalities.
Remember that.
Those who are more likely to
become saints are the ones
who are godly, who are devout.
Those who are neither here nor there, even
God doesn't know what to do with them.
You let them live like that fat cat
that's 20 years old, you don't put it
to sleep, you let it live, you feed it,
it drags itself around the house, wiping
the dust with its belly on the floor.
And Saint Anthony goes to the
shore and shouts towards the
sea, preaching, and what happens?
Somewhere in the distance,
fish began to gather.
Fish that have three brain cells.
Three brain cells, maybe I said
too much, rose above the sea to
hear what Saint Anthony had to say.
People, no.
This is not the only case in history.
We have several instances in history where
saints who were intimately connected with
God, to whom nature spoke, who in their
lives returned to that old peace that
existed between man and all of creation.
Saint Anthony preaching to the fish,
Saint Francis befriending the wolf
and resolving the situation in Gubbio
so that the foolish wolf doesn't
devour the poor sheep, and in return,
the villagers will feed the wolf.
That was diplomacy,
not what we hear today.
That was diplomacy.
So, why then, when we see a fresco
of Saint Anthony, when we see
depictions of Saint Anthony in various
places, Saint Anthony is always
depicted, most often in three ways.
The first and most obvious is
with the child Jesus in his arms.
So, with the child Jesus in his arms.
The second is the lily.
On that blessed coat of arms you see
throughout the basilica, I think you
really have to be blind not to have
noticed that coat of arms, it says
"florete quasi lilium" underneath,
which means "bloom like the lily." So,
the lily is a symbol, that's why it's
the motto of the Basilica because the
lily is a symbol of Saint Anthony.
And the third, I wouldn't say the
most important, maybe the most
important is the baby Jesus, is
the Holy Scripture, the Bible.
Saint Anthony holds the Bible in his hand,
but he doesn't hold it like we do when
the priest comes to bless the family.
The hair I have left falls out when I
enter a family's blessing and see a Bible
that evidently no one has ever opened
because it's still wrapped in cellophane.
And related to that, they say, look
how beautiful and new our Bible is.
I say, I see it's unopened.
And then they realize that...
An untouched Bible is not a
source of pride but a shame.
If your Bible isn't worn out, if there are
no marks from yellowed fingers on it, if
you've never underlined anything in your
Bible, you don't know what to do with it.
It's understandable that sometimes we
don't know what to do with the Bible
because we often make the big mistake of
starting to read it from the beginning.
The Bible should not be
read from the beginning.
You should start reading the
Bible from the Gospel of Matthew.
Someone should have taught you
this at some point in your life,
and if they didn't, I'm sorry,
that's a significant oversight.
Why not from the beginning?
Well, by the time you get to Leviticus
with all the animal sacrifices and
those octopuses and tadpoles, I
just close the Bible, don't you?
I can't, it makes me sick,
I don't like the drawings, I
can't see those sea creatures,
I don't have to enjoy the Bible.
And a lot of vocabulary, aorists,
imperfects, all those things
we don't regularly use in our
everyday speech, discourage us.
And I don't want to go through with
you now how you should read the
Bible, there are hundreds of places
where you can learn that, but I
actually just want to finish with one
thing: that we be those evangelical
teachers, like Saint Anthony was.
We constantly call each other
to be holy, and that's great.
And I think somehow that from
the Second Vatican Council to
today, in the past 50-60 years,
at least we've understood that.
It took us 60 years, people of God.
For us to understand that we
are all called to holiness.
Just that one sentence to sink in.
Maybe in the next 50 years,
we'll realize that we are all
called to be witnesses of faith.
We might not be martyrs, probably not.
But tell me you've never been
persecuted for your faith.
Tell me you've never felt that look
when someone glares at you for making
the sign of the cross in a restaurant.
That you've never felt
judged for dressing modestly.
Today, people aren't judged for dressing
immodestly, but for dressing modestly,
and then they say, "Look, a nun." It's
a completely distorted value system.
Tell me you've never felt people
giving you strange looks if they hear
Božja pobjeda or Amoroze or whoever is
playing in your headphones on the tram.
We feel it, and we feel it very strongly,
how many relationships have broken up when
the question of premarital purity came up.
It's better to break up early, as someone
who deals with a dreadful matter here,
which is the annulment of Christian
marriages, that's one of my jobs.
Believe me, it's better to break up in
time if the differences are too great.
Nothing significant will change
when you receive the sacrament
of marriage, believe me.
Did I change a lot when I was ordained?
Not really, I'd say, maybe I just became
more aware of how I was all along?
That's debatable.
And that's why today I invite us
to be those evangelical teachers.
Fr.
Today, Stjepan touched on a very
important matter in his sermon, and
that important matter is to stop
being afraid to talk about our faith.
Let's stop being afraid
to witness our faith.
Who are we afraid of?
Who is afraid in front of us?
Who is afraid to wave their
ideology in front of us?
Who?
But Christianity is not an
ideology; Christianity is a person.
Not one person but three
persons in one God: the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
And that is why it is very, very
important, more important today than ever,
to seriously embrace the word of God.
To seriously accept the word of God.
There is no question you can ask God
that isn't answered in the Bible.
Your day cannot start without
at least going online and
listening to the reflection of
the day, the gospel of the day.
Your grandparents and mine might have
had an excuse back then, maybe even my
parents, maybe not yours, but my parents,
because, well, there wasn't a way.
There was no religious education
in schools, no internet, no books,
no literature from which they could
learn... Today, don't make me laugh.
That we today cannot
seriously study our faith.
And as Fr. Stjepan often says, you
come to me and say, so I will say it
now, you come to me and say, in the
family, when we discuss or in society
about faith, they all present some
arguments and I stay silent, like
a fish out of water, just gaping.
Mava.
Because what will you speak
from when your head is empty?
When you don't know about faith.
When we have read the Catechism of
the Catholic Church from beginning
to end, and then what happens?
You go to dnevno.hr, one of
the most desperate criminal
portals that exist in the world.
Remember that well.
Sensationalist click-baiters,
plain and simple, nothing else.
And there it says, the
church banned blah blah blah.
And we, oh look, the church forbade it.
Or, the church allowed it, oh look,
the naughty church allowed it.
And what do you do?
Share, share, share, share, share.
You know when you get those annoying
messages forwarded many times, I
break out in hives when I see that,
I know immediately what it is.
As soon as I see it’s been forwarded many
times, without any thought, without any
responsibility, without any sense that
what you, as a Catholic, forwarded to
someone who isn’t, how much your word is
worth in their eyes and in their ears.
It is not insignificant what I, as
a friar, say because of what I wear.
I realized this 17 years ago
when I came to this monastery.
Similarly, it is not insignificant
what you say to each other
because they know you come here.
The standards are higher and the
responsibility before God is greater.
This is what I would like us to take
from the Holy Scriptures about the
theology of Saint Anthony and his wisdom.
Do not be afraid to open
your ears to the Holy Spirit.
Jesus promised.
When you don't know what to say, when
they bring you before kings—though we
probably won't be brought before kings,
as that's a thing of the past—but when
they crucify you here, crucify you here,
say this about you, say that, publicly
call you out, don't be afraid, He says.
It's expected, it will happen.
Jesus said it.
Do not plan your defense in advance.
Even you, when you are with your families,
don't You know when someone... Attacks
you and then you don't know what to
say at that moment, and then you go,
I don't know, take a shower or go to
training or go for a walk and then it
comes to your mind, oh, I could have
said this, oh, I should have said that,
oh, and this, oh how I could have...
No, if you were supposed to
say it, you would have said it.
No, let God lead.
At that moment, maybe that
person didn't need a dragon.
They needed a lamb, and you'll
evangelize more when you're a lamb.
But sometimes you do need to be
a dragon, not the dragon from
Revelation, but a force in words,
to be resolute, to be clear.
And you serve it and then you eat it.
It's like when you eat beef
that hasn't been cooked well,
it's like chewing on a shoe.
That rubber, chew, chew, chew.
Sometimes that's the Word of God.
No one ever promised that the Word
of God would be easily digestible,
like millet or some light proteins.
Sometimes the Word of God is really hard
on the stomach, and you shouldn't think
you're on the wrong path because of that.
You don't fully understand why the
church teaches this or that way, kneel.
I studied my theology on my knees,
before the Blessed Sacrament.
And I held a few of my books
like this before the sacrament
and asked, what is this?
Not, what is this, I said.
What is this?
I don't understand any of it.
And he is silent, and the book is
silent, and I am silent, and nothing.
I continue on, still kneeling.
I can't be stubborn, and
neither can I. I will kneel
here until it makes sense to me.
That's what's important to us,
and I want you to take that with
you as we prepare for our beloved
seventh St. Anthony's walk.
Now, I will stop here.
I will finish with the words of St.
Anthony who says this: If you preach
Jesus, he softens hardened hearts.
If you call upon Him, your
bitter temptations become sweet.
If you think about Him,
He enlightens your heart.
If you read about Jesus,
He nourishes your mind.
Thank you very much and
have a pleasant evening.